Doc to help determine action when CVE is reported (#4181)
dotnet/dotnet-docker: documentation/vulnerability-reporting.md

# Determining Action for Container Vulnerabilities

This documented is intended to help guide you to the appropriate course of action when encountering reported vulnerabilities in the .NET container images.
The flowchart below describes a series of questions to help determine the state of the image being reported upon.
By answering each question, it will eventually direct you to the action to help resolve your vulnerability.

```mermaid

> flowchart

Author: I would say no. You need a magnifying glass with horizontal.

* If you're using a tag for a specific Windows version that is no longer supported, you'll need to move to a supported version of Windows. For example, `6.0-nanoserver-20H2` => `6.0-nanoserver-ltsc2022`

See our [supported tag policy](supported-tags.md) for more information.

### E. Is your image built from the latest .NET base image?

TODO: This section needs more work. Ideally it would just use <https://github.com/richlander/lucy> but that needs more work to better support multi-arch tags.

Run one of the scripts below to determine whether your image is built on the latest .NET base image. Provide the [image digest](#what-is-an-image-digest) and tag of the base image as input. If the base image tag is a [multi-arch tag](#how-do-i-know-if-my-tag-is-multi-arch), you'll 

An output of `True` means that your image is built from the latest .NET base image.
A value of `False` means it is not built on the latest.

#### Linux

```shell
myImage="<insert-my-image-digest>"

> baseImage="<insert-base-image-tag>"

Author: Good suggestion. That was actually a very easy script to write.

    result=$(if docker inspect $myImage | jq -r .[0].RootFS.Layers | grep -q $lastLayer; then echo "True"; else echo "False"; fi)
    echo
    echo "Result: $result"
}
isBuiltOnLatestBaseImage
```

#### PowerShell

```powershell
$myImage = "<insert-my-image-digest>"
$dotnetImage = "<insert-dotnet-base-image-tag>"

docker pull $myImage
docker pull $dotnetImage

$lastLayer = (docker inspect $dotnetImage | ConvertFrom-Json).RootFS.Layers[-1]
(docker inspect $myImage | ConvertFrom-Json).RootFS.Layers.Contains($lastLayer)
```

### F. Rebuild your image to get latest base

Since your image is out of date with the latest version of the .NET base image, rebuilding it will ensure it's up-to-date. Be sure that your workflow explicitly pulls the .NET base image tag rather than using a potentially cached version of it.

### G. Which OS platform is this for?

If you don't know whether the image you're using is based on Windows or Linux, you can determine that by following these steps:

1. If you're using Docker Desktop for Windows, [change your settings](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/settings/windows/) to target Linux containers.

1. Run the following command:

    ```shell

>     docker pull <insert-my-image-digest>

Author: I use that in the other script because that's specific to Linux containers. Your suggestion will fail if attempting to pull an image of a different OS type. So you may not even get to the point of running `docker inspect`. That's why the instructions here make the determination based on the error message or not.

To find this score, search for the CVE at the [CVE site](https://www.cve.org/SiteSearch).
The score will consist of both a number and a label.
Note whether the label indicates "High" or "Critical".

### K. Is package in Linux distro base image?

## Appendix

### What is an image digest?

An image digest is a unique identifier for the image.
It allows you to retrieve that specific image and know that you're getting the same version as someone else that also used that same image digest.
Contrast image digests with image tags which are mutable and cannot be relied upon for ensuring you're getting the exact version of the image you need.
An image tag can be updated multiple times over its lifetime to point to different image digests.

An image digest is a SHA256 value and has the form `sha256:<value>`.
In order to pull an image by its digest, you need to know its registry, repository name, and digest.
The digest is appended to the repository name, separated by an `@` symbol: (e.g.
`mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:1983d7d0dec846cb92e59fb01eaa3e7f3a65071ca29c7db4075edefcf20db47a`).

### How do I know if my tag is multi-arch?

Run one of these commands:

#### Linux

```shell

> docker manifest inspect <image-tag> | jq -r .mediaType

Author: Experimental mode is [enabled by default](https://docs.docker.com/engine/reference/commandline/cli/#experimental-features) now. In fact, you can't even disable it: https://github.com/docker/cli/commit/977d3ae046ec6c64be8788a8712251ed547a2bdb. For that reason, I don't think it's worth mentioning.

### C. Is your image built from a supported .NET tag?

When .NET drops support for an image tag, it means it will no longer be updated, even when there is a new base OS image available.
This means that vulnerabilities will be reported for that image over time if it continues to be used.
Our [supported tag policy](supported-tags.md) provides detailed information about when these tags are no longer supported.
The simple rule to follow: if the tag isn't shown in our [tag listing](supported-tags.md#tag-listing), it's not supported.

This script can be used to determine if the .NET image tag is supported:

#### Linux

Requires [PowerShell to be installed](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-on-linux).

```shell
dotnetImage="<insert-dotnet-image-tag>" # example: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:7.0
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-tag-support.ps1 | pwsh /dev/stdin $dotnetImage
```

#### Windows

```powershell
dotnetImage="<insert-dotnet-image-tag>" # example: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:7.0
[Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = [Net.SecurityProtocolType]::Tls12

> &([scriptblock]::Create((Invoke-WebRequest -UseBasicParsing 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-tag-support.ps1'))) $dotnetImage

Author: This was because I added strict mode after testing it. Doh. Fixed.

It's important to realize that these updates likely contain security fixes.
Even though you may be using a supported tag, it's possible you're using an older image that has since been replaced by a newer version with that same tag.
Only the latest image for that tag is supported.
Run one of the scripts below to determine whether your image is built on the latest image for that tag. Provide the [image digest](#what-is-an-image-digest) of your image and tag of the .NET image (e.g. `mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:6.0`) as input.

A result of `True` means that your image is built from the latest .NET image.
A result of `False` means it is not built on the latest .NET image and must be updated.

#### Linux

Requires [PowerShell to be installed](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-on-linux).

```shell
myImage="<insert-my-image-digest>" # format: <registry>/<repo>@sha256:<digest>
dotnetBaseImage="<insert-dotnet-image-tag>" # example: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:7.0

> curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-latest-bash.ps1 | pwsh /dev/stdin $myImage $dotnetBaseImage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-latest-base.ps1 | pwsh /dev/stdin $myImage $dotnetBaseImage
```

```

#### Windows

> ```powershell

Reviewer: I'm getting an error when executing this:

```
Exception calling "Create" with "1" argument(s): "At line:58 char:9
+         | Where-Object { $_.platform.Architecture -eq $imageConfig.Ar ...
+         ~
An empty pipe element is not allowed.
At line:59 char:9
+         | Select-Object -ExpandProperty digest
+         ~
An empty pipe element is not allowed."
At line:1 char:1
+ &([scriptblock]::Create((Invoke-WebRequest -UseBasicParsing 'https:// ...
+ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
    + CategoryInfo          : NotSpecified: (:) [], MethodInvocationException
    + FullyQualifiedErrorId : ParseException
```

Here is the input I ran:

```
$myImage="mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:6274b2bdaba286678f4873a56194ea310f404ec9ae763e27a3d1a65f12ec5d26" # format: <registry>/<repo>@sha256:<digest>
$dotnetBaseImage="mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/runtime-deps:7.0-alpine-amd64" # example: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:7.0
[Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = [Net.SecurityProtocolType]::Tls12
&([scriptblock]::Create((Invoke-WebRequest -UseBasicParsing 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/d18e5659ec1f95735a1706c76b69cfd71c4ffc86/documentation/scripts/check-latest-base.ps1'))) $myImage $dotnetBaseImage
```

Author: The digest you specified doesn't exist:

```
Pulling mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:6274b2bdaba286678f4873a56194ea310f404ec9ae763e27a3d1a65f12ec5d26...
Error response from daemon: manifest for mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:6274b2bdaba286678f4873a56194ea310f404ec9ae763e27a3d1a65f12ec5d26 not found: manifest unknown: manifest sha256:6274b2bdaba286678f4873a56194ea310f404ec9ae763e27a3d1a65f12ec5d26 is not found
```

Can you provide a valid one? I'm unable to reproduce what you're seeing with the ones I've tried.

Reviewer: I am still getting the same error.  This time I validated the sha was valid.

``` bash
> docker pull mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:e59ce8b5c10e0676f60954fab0494fcc27d845bd15bf08ccde996305f44fadb7
mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:e59ce8b5c10e0676f60954fab0494fcc27d845bd15bf08ccde996305f44fadb7: Pulling from dotnet/samples
Digest: sha256:e59ce8b5c10e0676f60954fab0494fcc27d845bd15bf08ccde996305f44fadb7
Status: Downloaded newer image for mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:e59ce8b5c10e0676f60954fab0494fcc27d845bd15bf08ccde996305f44fadb7
mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:e59ce8b5c10e0676f60954fab0494fcc27d845bd15bf08ccde996305f44fadb7
```

``` bash
PS C:\Users\msimons\Downloads> $myImage="mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:e59ce8b5c10e0676f60954fab0494fcc27d845bd15bf08ccde996305f44fadb7" # format: <registry>/<repo>@sha256:<digest>
PS C:\Users\msimons\Downloads> $dotnetBaseImage="mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/runtime-deps:7.0-alpine-amd64" # example: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:7.0
PS C:\Users\msimons\Downloads> [Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = [Net.SecurityProtocolType]::Tls12
PS C:\Users\msimons\Downloads> &([scriptblock]::Create((Invoke-WebRequest -UseBasicParsing 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/d18e5659ec1f95735a1706c76b69cfd71c4ffc86/documentation/scripts/check-latest-base.ps1'))) $myImage $dotnetBaseImage
Exception calling "Create" with "1" argument(s): "At line:58 char:9
+         | Where-Object { $_.platform.Architecture -eq $imageConfig.Ar ...
+         ~
An empty pipe element is not allowed.
At line:59 char:9
+         | Select-Object -ExpandProperty digest
+         ~
An empty pipe element is not allowed."
At line:1 char:1
+ &([scriptblock]::Create((Invoke-WebRequest -UseBasicParsing 'https:// ...
+ ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
    + CategoryInfo          : NotSpecified: (:) [], MethodInvocationException
    + FullyQualifiedErrorId : ParseException
```

$myImage="<insert-my-image-digest>" # format: <registry>/<repo>@sha256:<digest>
$dotnetBaseImage="<insert-dotnet-image-tag>" # example: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:7.0
[Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = [Net.SecurityProtocolType]::Tls12

> &([scriptblock]::Create((Invoke-WebRequest -UseBasicParsing 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-latest-bash.ps1'))) $myImage $dotnetBaseImage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
&([scriptblock]::Create((Invoke-WebRequest -UseBasicParsing 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-latest-base.ps1'))) $myImage $dotnetBaseImage
```

We can't take any action if a fixed version of the package isn't available from the package repository of the Linux distro version.
Sometimes fixes aren't ever made available because they are low severity or not applicable in container environments.
Questions on this matter should be directed to the relevant Linux distro.
If you're not already using [Alpine Linux](../samples/selecting-tags.md#alpine), you may want to consider using it instead because of its security focus and low number of vulnerabilities.

### L. Is the package in the Linux distro base image?

It's important to determine whether the Linux package in question is installed by the layers of the Linux distro base image rather than the layers of the .NET image.
You'll first need to [determine the image tag of the Linux distro base image](#how-can-i-determine-the-tag-of-the-linux-distro-image-that-my-image-is-based-upon).
Then you can execute the script below to determine whether the package is installed by the Linux distro base image.

#### Linux

Requires [PowerShell](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-on-linux) to be installed.

```shell

> imageName="<insert-linux-base-image-name>"

Reviewer: Consider adding an example here e.g. # example: alpine:3.17

> curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-package-install.ps1 | pwsh /dev/stdin $imageName

Reviewer: Isn't this missing the package name?  Same applies to the windows snippet.

Reviewer: It would also be helpful to clarify the format of the package name e.g. the version numbers can be confusing to people who are not familiar with packages.

Author: This is added in section J.

```

### M. Wait for an updated Linux distro base image

.NET is dependent on the Linux distribution maintainers to produce updated versions of the base images that are used by the .NET container images.
Since the vulnerable package is contained in the Linux distro base image, you'll need to wait until a new version of the base image is available that contains the fixed package.
Once that is available, the .NET image will be updated to use it.
See our [image update policy](../README.md#image-update-policy) for more details.

### N. Is the package installed by .NET

Run the script below to determine whether the package is installed by one of the .NET image layers.
This script is only accurate if you've first [determined that the package is not installed by the Linux distro base image](l-is-the-package-in-the-linux-distro-base-image) so make sure you've followed that part of the workflow first.

#### Linux

Requires [PowerShell to be installed](https://learn.microsoft.com/powershell/scripting/install/installing-powershell-on-linux).

```shell
imageName="<insert-dotnet-image-name>" # example: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:7.0

> curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-package-install.ps1 | pwsh /dev/stdin $imageName

Reviewer: Same issue here as earlier, the package name option is missing

```

#### Windows

```powershell
$imageName="<insert-linux-base-image-name>" # example: mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/aspnet:7.0
[Net.ServicePointManager]::SecurityProtocol = [Net.SecurityProtocolType]::Tls12
&([scriptblock]::Create((Invoke-WebRequest -UseBasicParsing 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/main/documentation/scripts/check-package-install.ps1'))) $imageName
```

### O. Rebuild your image to get the latest package

Because the package is not installed by the Linux distro base image or .NET, it must be installed by your Dockerfile.

> Check your Dockerfile to check how the package is being installed.

Reviewer: Avoiding using `Check` multiple times in this sentence.

If no package version is specified, then you should be able to rebuild your image to get the latest version of the package.
Otherwise, you'll need to update your Dockerfile to specify the latest version of the package before rebuilding.

### P. Is it High/Critical severity?

The severity of a vulnerability is indicated by its Common Vulnerability Scoring System (CVSS) base score.
To find this score, search for the CVE at the [CVE site](https://www.cve.org/SiteSearch).
The score will consist of both a number and a label.
Note whether the label indicates "High" or "Critical".

### Q. Wait for the next .NET servicing release

> Given that the vulnerability does not have a high severity, it will be addressed in the next .NET servicing release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Given that the vulnerability does not have a critical or high severity, it will be addressed in the next .NET servicing release.
```

These occur on Update Tuesday (the second Tuesday of each month).

### R. Log an issue at dotnet/dotnet-docker

This vulnerability can be directly addressed by the .NET team.
Log an issue at [dotnet/dotnet-docker](https://github.com/dotnet/dotnet-docker/issues/new/choose) and provide the vulnerability ID and the .NET image tag you've identified as being affected.

## Appendix

### What is an image digest?

An image digest is a unique identifier for the image.
It allows you to retrieve that specific image and know that you're getting the same version as someone else that also used that same image digest.

> Contrast image digests with image tags which are mutable and cannot be relied upon for ensuring you're getting an exact version of the image every time.

Reviewer: This reads a little strange to me.

```suggestion
Contrasting image tags with image digests, image tags are mutable and cannot be relied upon for ensuring you're getting an exact version of the image every time.
```

An image tag can be updated multiple times over its lifetime to point to different image digests.

An image digest is a SHA256 value and has the form `sha256:<value>`.
In order to pull an image by its digest, you need to know its registry, repository name, and digest.
The digest is appended to the repository name, separated by an `@` symbol: (e.g.
`mcr.microsoft.com/dotnet/samples@sha256:1983d7d0dec846cb92e59fb01eaa3e7f3a65071ca29c7db4075edefcf20db47a`).

### How can I determine whether my image is based on Linux or Windows?

> 1. If you're using Docker Desktop for Windows, [change your settings](https://docs.docker.com/desktop/settings/windows/) to target Linux containers.

Reviewer: It will be interesting to see if we get feedback here from MacOS users.

Author: It shouldn't matter. The only cases you need to actually run containers locally is when you're investigating a vulnerability in a Linux container. So the instructions are valid for all OS types.

### J. Is a fix available for the package from the Linux distro?

These steps will help you determine whether a fix is available for the package and what the actual name of the package is.

The vulnerability scanner or the [Linux distro's vulnerability page](#how-can-i-view-the-linux-distros-information-about-a-vulnerability) will provide the name of the vulnerable package.

In some cases, this name doesn't match the name of the package that you would see installed in the image.
For example, [CVE-2022-42898](https://security-tracker.debian.org/tracker/CVE-2022-42898) indicates the name of the package is `krb5`.

> But this indicates the name of the source package, not the name of the binary package that would be installed in an image.

Reviewer: Consider referencing the distro's package manager here.

```suggestion
But this indicates the name of the source package, not the name of the binary package that would be installed from the distro's package manager.
```
